# Hypoxia effects on the spatial dynamics of a coastal fishery

Kevin M. Purcell^1*^, J. Kevin Craig^1^, Jim M. Nance^2^, Martin D. Smith^3^, Lori S. Bennear^3^

^1^ Beaufort Laboratory, National Marine Fisheries Service, Beaufort, NC, USA  
^2^ Galveston Laboratory, National Marine Fisheries Service, Galveston, TX, USA  
^3^ Nicholas School of the Environment, Duke University, Durham, NC, USA  
^*^ Corresponding E-mail:  kevin@kevin-purcell.com  

## Abstract  
The northwestern Gulf of Mexico currently experiences the largest seasonal hypoxic zones in the western hemisphere.  Hypoxia (DO \leq 2.0 mg^-1^L) is most severe from May-August during the height of the Gulf shrimp trawl fishery, but the effects of hypoxia on the shrimp fishery are not well known.  Prior studies indicate that hypoxia alters the spatial dynamics of nektonic species through habitat loss and aggregation in nearby oxygenated refuge habitats. We hypothesized that hypoxia-induced changes in the distribution of shrimp may alter the spatial dynamics of shrimping effort in the Gulf shrimp fishery. We integrated a high resolution data set on the geographic distribution of individual shrimp tows with hydrographic survey data on the distribution of bottom dissolved oxygen to evaluate the effects of hypoxia on spatial patterns in shrimping effort.  Our analyses indicate a shift in shrimping effort to waters inshore and westward of the hypoxic zone when hypoxia is severe.  In addition, average tow duration and tow density declined in areas that experienced low bottom oxygen.  Off Texas, where hypoxia extends over a smaller area and is more patchily distributed, shrimpers appeared to avoid low bottom oxygen, while shrimpers off of Louisiana, where hypoxia extends over most of the shrimping grounds, expended considerable effort in low oxygen waters.  Overall, our results indicate that hypoxia alters the spatial dynamics of the Gulf shrimp fishery with both potential positive and negative effects on shrimp harvest.  

## Introduction
While there is significant debate concerning the decline of global fishery landings [@worm2012future; @zeller2005good; @pauly2003future] there is little debate that the spatial footprint of global fisheries is expanding [@stewart2010characterizing;@swartz2010spatial].  A recent study [@watson2012global] reported that commercial fishing fleets operate in all the global oceans with a ten fold or greater increase in fishing power in the last 60 years.  As the global footprint of commercial fisheries expands it is critical to develop an understanding of the mechanisms dictating the spatial dynamics and allocation of fishing effort.  A failure to appreciate fleet dynamics can have unintended consequences for fishery management because of the crucial interaction between the spatial allocation of fishery effort and the spatial distribution of resource abundance [@wilen2002avoiding; Rose1999hyperaggregation;@branch_fleet_2006].  Fleet dynamics and fisherman behavior have been the subject of a number of recent studies[@abernethy2007fishers; @branch_fleet_2006], however this work primarily focuses on profit maximization [@van_putten_theories_2012] and risk aversion [@dowling2013risk] without explicitly evaluating the role of environmental disturbances on fleet dynamics.  

Marine and coastal ecosystems are being increasingly affected by patterns of environmental hypoxia which have been documented in over 400 marine systems globally and affecting greater than 240,000 km^2^ [@diaz_spreading_2008].  Environmental hypoxia (dissolved oxygen (DO) < 2 mgL^-1^), is generally a product of excess consumption of oxygen through respiration and chemical processes relative to the rate of oxygen production.  Hypoxia is especially common in shallow coastal systems with high nutrient inputs, long water residence times and strong physical stratification [@rabalais_global_2009].  Currently, the northern Gulf of Mexico (Gulf) experiences one of the largest seasonal hypoxia zones in the western hemisphere [@rabalais_beyond_2002].  The areal extent of hypoxia in the Gulf has been estimated annually since 1985 and has exceeded 20,000 km^2^ in several recent years [@rabalais_beyond_2002; @turner_gulf_2008].  Hindcasting models and sediment paleo-indicator studies suggest low oxygen stress in the Gulf beginning in the early 1900s and becoming increasingly severe in the 1960s and 1970s [@justic_forecasting_2007; @rabalais_sediments_2007; @greene_multiple_2009]. In the Gulf hypoxia is driven by the combined effects of nutrient inputs which have increased three-fold since the 1950s [@rabalais_sediments_2007] and vertical salinity stratification associated with the outflows of the Mississippi-Atchafalaya River system [@rabalais_beyond_2002; @bianchi_science_2010].  The hypoxic zone (region with < 2.0 mgL^-1^ DO) is highly variable spatially, depending on prevailing weather patterns and coastal currents [@feng2012relative; @hetland_skill_2012; @wiseman_seasonal_1997].

The Gulf shrimp fishery is an open access, bottom trawl fishery occurring throughout the coastal shelf of the Gulf of Mexico Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ), from southern Florida to the Texas-Mexico border.  The majority of shrimping effort occurs in the northwestern Gulf and predominantly targets two Penaeid shrimp species: the Brown shrimp *Farfantepenaeus aztecus* and the White shrimp *Litopenaeus setiferus*.  The fishery began in 1917 with an inshore artisanal fleet focusing on white shrimp and has grown to a large commercial fleet in excess of 20,000 vessels [@condrey_us_2005; @diamond_bycatch_2004].  Historically, Gulf shrimp landings provided roughly 73\% of the total shrimp landings in the US [@iverson_fisheries_2009] and the fishery was valued at > \$500M USD annually, making it one of the most valuable single species fisheries in the US [@nance_effort_1993; @diamond_bycatch_2004]. 

The region of the northwestern Gulf associated with the Mississippi-Atchafaylaya river plume has been referred to as the "Fertile Fishery Crescent" [@gunter_mississippi_1963] and has supported some of the most productive fishing grounds within U.S. coastal waters [@chesney_louisiana_2000].  The spatial overlap between this region of high fishery productivity and large scale seasonal hypoxia has led to a number of studies focused on the interaction between nektonic populations and coastal hypoxia which have in general shown that nekton populations tend to respond spatially to spatially heterogeneous disturbance of hypoxia [@caddy_toward_1993; @breitburg_nutrient_2009; @rose_does_2009; @essington_quantifying_2010].  More specifically, Craig et al.[@craig_spatial_2005] examined the spatial distribution of *F. aztecus* in the northwestern Gulf of Mexico and reported that wide spread hypoxia (> 20,000 km^2^) results in a ~25\% reduction in shrimp habitat coupled with shifts in spatial distribution both inshore and offshore of hypoxic regions.  Craig and Crowder [@craig_hypoxia-induced_2005] reported that both *F. aztecus* and Atlantic Croaker (*Micropogonias undulates*) show clear patterns of avoidance in very low oxygenated waters and increased abundance at moderate (1.6-3.7 mgL^-1^) levels of dissolved oxygen, indicating possible associations with hypoxia edge habitats.  More recently, Craig [@craig_aggregation_2012] examined two 4000-5000 km^2^ regions of the Louisiana coastal shelf, and found that for *F. aztecus* and a number of finfish species dissolved oxygen avoidance thresholds were on average 1-3 mgL^-1^ and that all species showed strong aggregations within 1-3 km of that edge of hypoxia.  

In this study we investigate the relationship between the spatial distribution of shrimping effort and seasonal bottom water hypoxia on the northwestern Gulf of Mexico continental shelf.  We used geospatial regression models to quantify the localized effects of low bottom DO on shrimping effort for regions that experience mild (Texas shelf) and severe (Louisiana shelf) hypoxia, after accounting for other potential environmental and economic drivers. We discuss the implications of environmentally-driven changes in the spatial dynamics of the Gulf shrimp fishery for shrimp harvest, bycatch interactions, and models used to inform management.  

## Methods  
### Shrimping Effort
In 1999 an electronic log-book (ELB) program was implemented in the northern Gulf of Mexico to quantify the spatial and temporal distribution of shrimping effort in the Gulf shrimp otter trawl fishery [@gallaway_description_2003]. A random sample of shrimp vessels was selected each trimester (Jan-Apr, May-Aug, Sep-Dec) and each vessel was instrumented with an electronic logbook (ELB). The ELB recorded the time and geographic position of the vessel every 10 minutes.  The duration of individual shrimp tows were identified based on changes in vessel speed which are typically 4-5 times slower (2-3 knots) when the shrimp nets are deployed than during other activities (i.e., steaming; 8-10 knots) [@gallaway_description_2003]. The starting location (latitude, longitude) of the tow was used to assign a geographic position to each tow.  Comparisons among the ELB, paper logbooks, and observer records have shown that this methodology provides an accurate representation of the spatial distribution of shrimping effort [@gallaway_development_2001;@gallaway_development_2000;@gallaway_description_2003]. The initial years of the ELB program instrumented a small number of vessels and were considered pilot studies  [@gallaway_evaluation_2003;@gallaway_description_2003].  We used ELB data collected over 6 years (2005-2010) and during the summer trimester (May --“ Aug)  consisting of 122,18 5individual tow records identified by a date, a tow duration (hours), and a starting latitude and longitude (Table 1).  On average about 13% of vessels in the northern Gulf were fitted with electronic logbooks from 2005-2010 (Table 1). In addition, these vessels were selected at random each year and extended over nearly all of the geographic range of the fishery (Supp. Fig 1).  

### Environmental Data
Bottom depth and hydrographic conditions in the northwestern Gulf were characterized using data from the Southeast Area Monitoring and Assessment Program (SEAMAP) survey [@eldridge_southeast_1988].  The SEAMAP survey is a fishery-independent trawl and hydrographic survey that has been conducted semi-annually in the northwestern Gulf (-97.3 to -88.0 west longitude and 3-110 m depth) since 1987. Bottom environmental conditions (e.g., temperatures, salinity, dissolved oxygen, depth) were measured at ~300 point locations per year, chosen based on a stratified random sampling design, using a conductivity, temperature, depth (CTD) profiler. Prior studies have used these data to quantify spatial patterns in bottom dissolved oxygen and environmental associations with multiple demersal species [@craig_spatial_2005; @craig_hypoxia-induced_2005; @craig2010habitat]. Additional details regarding the SEAMAP survey and sampling procedures can be found in Eldridge [@eldridge_southeast_1988] and the annual SEAMAP atlases [@rester_seamap_2011].  

We generated interpolated surfaces of water depth (m) and summer (June-July) bottom dissolved oxygen (mgL^-1^) over the northwestern Gulf of Mexico shelf. Bottom temperature and salinity were considered in preliminary analyses but were removed due to high correlations with water depth.  Following earlier studies [@craig_spatial_2005], bottom water DO was interpolated for each year of ELB data (2005-2010) using universal kriging with a quadratic drift component, and a variable search radius with a sample count of at least 12 nearest neighbors.  Water depth was interpolated using inverse distance weighting of all SEAMAP records for surveys from 2005--2010 ($n$ = 7200). 

Because only the starting location of individual shrimp tows, which can extend over several hours and vary in direction, were known,  a spatial smoothing procedure of the interpolated dissolved oxygen surfaces was conducted prior to matching individual tows with particular dissolved oxygen conditions on the shelf.  Interpolated surfaces were post-processed using the Focal Statistics geoprocessing tool (ESRI, Redlands, CA), to calculate an average interpolation value for each grid cell based on a defined spatial neighborhood. We defined a square 3x3 neighborhood matrix of 5 km^2^ cells, with the grid cell of interest located in the center.  For each cell in the interpolated surface the predicted dissolved oxygen values were averaged across the surrounding spatial neighborhood covering a 45 km^2^ area.  Contours for final predicted dissolved oxygen layers were visually assessed for agreement with point measurements of bottom dissolved oxygen.  All interpolations were conducted in ArcMap v10.1 using the Spatial Analyst or Neighborhood toolbox (ERSI, Redlands, CA).  

### Data set Integration  
Individual shrimp tows identified from the ELB database were assigned bottom DO and depth values by sampling the interpolated and smoothed maps of hydrographic data collected on SEAMAP cruises. A challenge in integrating disparate datasets is the different spatial and temporal scales at which data are collected. Hydrographic data is collected on SEAMAP cruises over about a 6 week period from early June to mid-July that occur in coastal waters from the Texas-Mexico border to the Mississippi-Alabama border.  Historically, the catch statistics for the shrimp fishery are collected in a series of 21 statistical zones [@nance_effort_1993] which are roughly delineated using $1\,^{\circ}$ longitude moving east to west and $1\,^{\circ}$ latitude moving north to south.  The SEAMAP survey operates within one or more of these zones during any given week of its bi-annual survey [@rester_seamap_2011].  To match fishery effort with the most synoptic environmental covariates we only used shrimp tows that took place within the same statistical zone in which the SEAMAP survey was operating and during that same sampling period during which SEAMAP was surveying that zone. 

Two economic covariates presumed to influence fishing behavior [@van_putten_theories_2012] were also inlcuded: shrimp market price per pound (*pPND*) and average weekly diesel fuel price (*pGAL*).  The market *pPND* of shrimp is maintained by NMFS Galveston laboratory as part of the shrimp fishery monitoring program. The diesel fuel time series (Ultra-low sulfur CARB diesel spot price) was taken from the U. S. Energy Information Administration (http://www.eia.gov). This continuous fuel time series consists of daily spot prices in US dollars for diesel fuel in Los Angeles, CA since 1996. This time series is highly correlated (R^2^ = 0.98) with a similar fuel price dataset specific to the Gulf of Mexico region that did not begin until June 2006.  

### Regression Models  
We tested the effects of water depth and bottom dissolved oxygen on the spatial distribution of shrimping effort on the northwestern Gulf of Mexico shelf using geospatial regression analysis. We used a quasi-experimental framework where separate models were generated for the Louisiana, Mississippi, and parts of the Alabama coast (-94 - -88 west longitude), a region that experiences recurrent bottom water hypoxia during summer, and the Texas shelf (-97 - -94 west longitude) shelf, a region that experiences limited hypoxia [@rabalais_beyond_2002;@turner_gulf_2008]. We developed three response variables that reflect different aspects of shrimping behavior: total shrimping effort, average tow duration, and tow density.  Each response variable was aggregated across cells within a 10x10 minute (256 km2) spatial grid extending across the northwestern Gulf of Mexico.  Total shrimping effort was the total number of tow hours within each cell, while alternative response variables were defined as the average tow duration within a cell and the tow density, or the number of tows conducted within a cell.  Environmental covariates were also averaged within each spatial grid cell.   

We used generalized additive models (GAMs) to investigate relationships between shrimping effort and environmental variables (DO, depth) using both spatial and non-spatial model formulations [@hastie_varying-coefficient_1993;@wood_stable_2004;@wood_generalized_2006].  All models were structured with a dependent variable representing a measure of shrimping effort, $X_{d,y,(\rho,\varphi)}$ on Julian day (*d*) in year (*y*) for a specific grid cell with a centroid location ($\rho,\varphi$).  Total shrimping effort and average tow duration, were log+1 transformed and modeled with a Gaussian error distribution, while average tow density was natively modeled assuming a Poisson error distribution.  

$$
\begin{aligned}
X_{d,y,(\rho,\varphi)}& = \alpha_1\,(y)\, +\, \alpha_2\,(pGAL)\, +\, \alpha_3\,(totEFF)\,+\, g_1\,(DO)\,  \\
                      &\,+\, g_2\,(D)\, +\, g_3\,(pPND)\, +\, g_4\,(JD)\,+\, g_5\,(\rho,\varphi)\, +\, e_{d,y,(\rho,\varphi)}
\end{aligned}
$$

The non-spatial model (Eq. 1), included nonparametric smooth terms for dissolved oxygen (*DO*) in mgL^-1^, depth (*D*) in meters, average weekly price per pound (*pPND*), day of the year ($JD$), and the latitude and longitude of each grid cell centroid in decimal degrees.  All predictors used thin plate regression splines and were modeled as 1- dimensional smoothing functions [@wood_stable_2004] except for location ($\rho,\varphi$) which was modeled using a 2-dimensional smoothing function [@wood_thin_2003].  The parametric variables $\alpha_1$, $\alpha_2$ and $\alpha_3$ are model coefficients for the effecets of year (*y*), average weekly fuel price ($pGAL$), and total shrimping effort (*totEFF*)for the nwGOM during the summer trimester (May - Aug), and $e_{d,y,(\rho,\varphi)}$ is a model specific error term.  Equation (1) models the average effect of DO on shrimping effort after accounting for the effects of other smoothed predictors in the model.  

Variable coefficient models are a class of regression model that allow coefficients to vary smoothly as a function of another model variable [@hastie_varying-coefficient_1993].  Variable-coefficient models that map variation in the relationship between a response and predictor variable across space are often referred to as geospatial regression models [@wood_generalized_2006] and have recently be applied to a number of ecological studies [@bacheler_spatial_2010;@bartolino_ontogenetic_2010;@ciannelli_phenological_2007;@ciannelli_non-additive_2012].  The spatial model formulation (Eq. 2) differs  from the stationary formulation by including and additional 2-dimensional smoothing function that allows the dissolved oxygen (*DO*) coefficient to vary smoothly as a function of space ($\rho,\varphi$):   

$$
\begin{aligned}
X_{d,y,(\rho,\varphi)}& = \alpha_1\,(y) + \alpha_2\,(pGAL) + \alpha_3\,(totEFF) + g_1\,(D) + g_2\,(pPND) \\
                      &\,+\, g_3\,(JD)\, +\, g_4\,(\rho,\varphi)\, +\, g_5\,(\rho,\varphi)\,DO\, +\, e_{d,y,(\rho,\varphi)}
\end{aligned}
$$

Spatial and non-spatial models were run separately for the Louisiana and Texas continental shelves, for the entire time period (2005-2010).  Spatial models were run for both regions for two individual years with the largest (2008: 22,300 km^2^) and smallest (2009: 7,100 km^2^) aerial extents of hypoxia.  All  regression models were conducted in the R 2.14.2 statistical computing environment using the R package mgcv 1.7-13.  

## Results
Spatial and non-spatial model formulations were similar in terms of effect sizes and the statistical significance of the predictor variables (Table 2).  Spatial models were marginally superior to non-spatial models for both the Louisiana and the Texas shelf in terms of GCV score. Evaluation of model residuals showed no significant departures from the underlying assumptions of normality and variance homogeneity.

Most shrimping on the Louisiana shelf occurred in shallow nearshore waters with effort declining sharply at depths > 25 m (Fig. 1A). On the Texas shelf, little effort occurred in shallow, nearshore waters with effort increasing with increasing depth, particularly from shore to depths of 30 m (Fig. 1B). Shrimping effort off Louisiana was highest during the early summer (prior to early July, < day 184) and declined sharply by late summer (Fig. 1c).  In contrast, effort was low during early summer off Texas and increased sharply by mid-summer (mid-July ~day 196) (Fig.1d). These differences in the timing and depth distribution of the fishery reflect different management objectives for the two regions. Texas manages for an offshore fishery by imposing an early season closure (no harvest prior to ~July 15) so that harvest is restricted until later in the summer when shrimp are larger and occur in deeper waters, while Louisiana is primarily a nearshore fishery that harvests smaller shrimp in shallow waters as they emigrate from the estuaries to the shelf. 
 
The effect of DO on shrimping effort also differed between the two regions (Fig. 1e,f).  On the Texas shelf, where hypoxia is much less severe, shrimping effort declined sharply at DO levels < 3 mgL^-1^ and the highest effort occurred at intermediate DO levels (3-5 mgL^-1^). On the Louisiana shelf, the highest effort also occurred at intermediate DO levels, but a considerable amount of effort occurred in hypoxic waters.  Effort on the Louisiana shelf was low at 2 mgL-1 but appeared to increase with further declines in DO (Fig. 1c).

The effect of DO on shrimping effort varied spatially on both the Texas and the Louisiana shelf (Fig. 2). When DO was low on the Texas shelf, effort declined in shallow nearshore waters and increased in deeper offshore waters.  This effect was consistent across nearly the entire Texas shelf (Fig. 2a).  In contrast, the spatial distribution of DO effects on the Louisiana shelf were patchier with multiple regions where shrimping effort was both positively and negatively related to bottom dissolved oxygen (Fig. 2b).  When DO was low on the Louisiana shelf, effort declined in the Louisiana Bight, a region of severe chronic hypoxia, as well in mid-shelf regions off of Atchafalaya Bay and to the west.  Shrimping effort increased in nearshore waters west of Atchafalaya Bay and mid-shelf waters between Terrebonne and Atchafalaya Bay

The spatial distribution of predicted shrimping effort differed between the years with the largest (2008: 22,300 km^2^) and smallest (2009: 7,100 km^2^) aerial extents of hypoxia (Fig. 3).  In 2008, the year of most severe hypoxia, the highest predicted effort occurred east of the Mississippi River delta and the lowest predicted effort occurred on the western Louisiana shelf offshore of Terrebonne and Atchafalaya Bays (Fig. 3a). In contrast, during 2009, the year of least severe hypoxia, the highest predicted effort occurred west of the Mississippi River delta including waters with some of the lowest effort the year before.  On the Texas shelf, the predicted spatial distribution of shrimping effort showed only minor differences between the two years (Fig. 3c,d). In both years the highest predicted effort occurred in the northeastern region of the Texas shelf. During the year of severe hypoxia (2008), regions of high shrimping effort appeared to be contracted in shallow nearshore waters on the upper Texas shelf and there was a region of very low effort near the Louisiana-Texas border.  During the year of moderate hypoxia (2009) effort was high in these regions as well, but extended along the southern Texas shelf and into deeper midshelf waters.    


Models for average tow duration and tow density showed significant or marginally significant effects for all model parameters (Table 3).  The average duration of a tow on the Louisiana shelf was fairly stable across a broad range of DO levels (0.5 -- 6.5 mgL^-1^), with a decline around 2 mgL
^-1^ and a peak near 3 mgL^-1^ (Figure 4a). A similar but weaker effect of DO on tow duration was evident on the Texas shelf (Figure 4b).  Models for tow density were more variable but showed the highest tow density at intermediate DO levels (2.5-4.5 mgL^-1^) and declines at DO < 2 mgL^-1^, particularly on the Louisiana shelf (Fig. 4c,d).  
     


## Discussion  
Our analysis of three fishing effort metrics, describing 6 years and ~36,000 fishery tow records, shows strong indications of a spatially mediated response by the Gulf shrimp fishery to hypoxia in the northwestern Gulf of Mexico.  We observed both positive and negative effects of dissolved oxygen on the Gulf shrimp fishery in both regional models.  Additionally we observed dramatic patterns in the spatial allocation of fishery resources when spatially explicit dissolved oxygen concentrations were considered.  Previous studies have utilized these methods to examine distribution shifts in biological resources [@bacheler_spatial_2010;@bartolino_historical_2012;@ciannelli_phenological_2007], however, to the authors knowledge, this is the first application to the distribution of fishery resources with respect to environmental conditions.  

The quasi-experimental framework created in our study, through the regional model comparison, shows us several important contrasts between the Louisiana and Texas fisheries.  First, we observed a negative effect of low dissolved oxygen on fishing effort in our analysis of the Texas shelf, this negative effect was observed in waters < 3 mgL^-1^, and was not observed in the Louisiana model.  This finding was not surprising given the low occurrence of hypoxia on the Texas shelf, our data set had only a small number of hypoxic data points for the Texas region (*n*=32) in comparison to the Louisiana shelf (*n*=5983).  This difference in the magnitude of hypoxia would allow for easier avoidance of hypoxic conditions spatially, in Texas waters relative to Louisiana waters.  Second, water depth and Julian day showed contrasting relationships with effort between regions with the Louisiana fishery favoring shallow waters earlier in the season, and the Texas fishery showing positive effects in deeper waters later in the season.  Additionally, we found that the market price for shrimp landings had positive effects on effort on the Texas shelf, specifically at values from \$3-4 USD per pound.  These differences in the regional fishery dynamics would seem to be a product of differing management practices between the regional fisheries, specifically the early season closure of Texas shrimping grounds [@klima_review_1982].  This difference between the Louisiana and Texas fisheries would seem to fit a traditional fishery economics model, in which profit maximization of the firm, or the fisherman, dictates the behavior of the firm [@van_putten_theories_2012].  Due to the Texas seasonal closure [@klima_review_1982;@matlock_did_2010], shrimp populations on the Texas shelves are typically of greater maturity and thereby of greater size, at greater depth during the period of fishery operation (mid-June - mid-July), this coupled with differences in the size of fishery fleets between Texas (*n*=2988) and Louisiana (*n*=9778)[@diamond_bycatch_2004] would favor a result in which more effort on the Texas shelf is expended on larger, and on average higher priced, shrimp landings relative to the Louisiana fishery.  

The spatial model formulation showed strong indications of a spatially mediated response by the Gulf shrimp fishery to regional hypoxia. Specifically, the heterogeneous spatial relationship between DO and fishing effort on the Louisina coast.  Additionally, the rate of change (i.e. correlation slopes) for the relationship between dissolved oxygen and fishing effort displayed larger values, both positive and negative, at the periphery of regions typically dominated by hypoxia.  For instance, large positive correlations were observed inshore and on the far western edge of the Louisiana shelf.  This regions is typically associated with the inshore edge of a hypoxic zone derived from Atchafalaya Bay effluent.  The large negative correlations observed offshore and across the shelf at the eastern edge of the Atchafalya Bay are also aligned with hypoxia edge habitat, specifically the offshore extent of hypoxia effects and the mid-shore gap that often develops between hypoxia water masses which develop from the Mississippi River and the Atachafalya Bay[@bianchi_science_2010]. These findings on the Louisiana shelf would seem to fit the results of previous studies focused on the species distributional responses to hypoxia.  A recent study by Craig [@craig_aggregation_2012], observed that the abundance of *F. aztecus* on the Louisiana shelf was elevated at distances from 1-3 km from the edge of the hypoxic zone, additionally this study showed that positive catches were spatially distributed both inshore and offshore of the hypoxic zone.  Further, additional studies have documented clear patterns of low oxygen (< 3 mgL^-1^) avoidance behavior among populations of *F. aztecus* and other nektonic species [@craig_hypoxia-induced_2005;@craig_spatial_2005].  While these studies do not temporally overlap our study the apparent pattern of spatially mediated avoidance of low oxygen conditions does display a spatial similarity to the response of the fishery itself, and would seem to support our hypothesis that while coastal hypoxia does not seem to be negatively effecting landings [@breitburg_nutrient_2009; @diaz1999ecological; @chesney2001effects] there are clear patterns of spatial effects on the allocation of effort which could have both ecological and economics consequences.  

In order to compare the spatial dynamics of the shrimp fishery during periods of high and low hypoxia we conducted model simulations comparinig predicted spatial distribution of fishing effort in 2008 (20,500 km^-2^) and 2009 (8000 km^-2^), annual fishery effort was relatively similar in both years with 80,732 and 76,427 total tow hours, respectively. This similarity in total fishing effort between model simulations indicates that relative shifts in effort allocation may be informative.  In the Louisiana simulations the most intriquing results were the spatial reallocation and consolidation of fishing effort, during high hypoxia.  Our analysis predicted fishing effort values east of the Mississippi River delta would be more than double the predicted fishing effort values for the entire Louisiana shelf.  Further we observed regions of fishing effort on the Louisiana shelf in which effort is predicted to be reducted by > 50\%. The spatial shifts and compression of fishery effort allocation during periods of high hypoxia, highlight the indirect effects of low dissolved oxygen concentration on the allocation of fishery resources.  This pattern of high fishing effort allocation just east of Mississippi River delta is compariable to previous findings of effort allocation surrounding marine reserves [@kellner2007fishing; @e2013fishers].  Abbot and Haynie [@abbott2012we] recently examined the ecological and economic implications of failing to anticipate changes in fishery behavior relative to management imposed spatial closures.  It seems that similar concerns are relevant to the Gulf shrimp fishery if the observed shifts indicated by our simulations would be a recurrent trend resulting from annual hypoxia phenomina.  

Additionally the spatial relationships between DO and fishing effort on the Louisiana shelf are more telling when compared to the model simulation results for the Texas shelf.  Overall, predicted effort patterns on the Texas shelf during low hypoxia were less spatially heterogeneous and correlated tightly with depth, with most effort focused inshore between Galveston and Corpus Christi bays.  Several significant difference were evident for the Texas model simulations during years of high hypoxia, particularly a region of low predicted effort in the north eastern corner of the Texas shelf and a significant expansion of predicted fishery across much of the souther Texas coastal shelf. These findings, especially spatial shifts away from Corpus Christi Bau and in to deeper waters were unexpected due to limited extent of hypoxia in Texas waters, which typically do not extend south of Galveston Bay [@rabalais_gulf_2002].  The dramatic difference in predicted effort between high and low hypoxia years on the Texas shelf could indicate that the fishery responds to hypoxia in aggregate and not with more regionally distinct behavior.  This interpretation is further supported by the fact that the spatial shifts observed do not seem to coincide with what is known about the incidence of hypoxia along the Texas coastal shelf [@osterman2003benthic].  Dimarco et al [@dimarco_texas_2012] showed, based on 2007-2008 SEAMAP data, that the Mississippi-Atchafalaya river system is not the only causal mechanism for hypoxia on the Texas shelf, however the only river system that feeds directly to the coastal shelf and not through an embayment or an estuary is the Brazos River [@harper_recovery_1991; @dimarco_texas_2012] which is located just south of Galveston Bay and relatively far from the offshore shifts we observed adjacent to Corpus Christi Bay.

One criticism of our study design could be that without tow specific landings information, a reduction in fishing effort within or adjacent to low oxygen regions could be seen as ambiguous.  This ambiguity derives from the issue of hyperstability, a condition in which catch rates remain unchanged regardless of reductions in population abundance because the fishery is better able to target and harvest a given resource [@harley_is_2001;@rose_hyperaggregation_1999].  To address these issues we developed models based on two additional response variables: average tow duration and tow density to indirectly evaluate tow quality.  The underlying assumption for all of our statistical models is that the parties (fisherman) being examined are following a profit maximization scheme and their behaviors are dictated by an underlying imperative to maximize returns while minimizing effort [@branch_fleet_2006;@van_putten_theories_2012].  Given this assumption and the knowledge that shrimp fisherman possess knowledge about landings accumulation rates based on readings from a tensiometer, a device that measures tension on the trawl rigging, our finding for the Louisiana self that at dissolved oxygen values < 2.5 mgL^-1^ average tow duration is decreasing could indicated reduced tow quality in hypoxic conditions.  We also found evidence of higher tow density within grid cells that have dissolved oxygen levels 2.5- 3.5 mgL^-1^ along the Louisiana shelf, possibly indicating increased searching behavior within low oxygen habitat.  To a lesser degree similar patterns were observed in low oxygen conditions within the Texas fishery indicating that these fishery behaviors may indeed be a response to catch indicators and not solely a location driven response to previous knowledge concerning the annual region over which hypoxia occurs.

If the spatial dynamics of the shrimp fishery are changing in response to seasonal hypoxia, increased opportunities for new biological interaction with non-target species could be created.  Nance et al. [@nance1998report] quantified levels of bycatch biomass within the shrimp trawl fishery and found that on average 29 kg of bycatch, or roughly 1300 organisms per hour, were captured by Gulf shrimp trawl fisherman.  While management initiatives have been developed since this time, such as bycatch reduction devices (BRDs), their efficacy has had diminishing returns over time [@diamond_bycatch_2004;@foster_status_2004].  It would seem, given that previous studies have reported that shrimp and nektonic species aggregate within 1-3 km of the edge of hypoxic zones [@craig_aggregation_2012;@craig_hypoxia-induced_2005], that any attempt by the fishery to modify its spatial deployment in response to or in anticipation of hypoxia effects, will increase opportunities for bycatch and additional non-target species interactions to develop.

While our analysis does not permit a quantification of the spatial extent of the Gulf shrimp fishery, differences in the spatially explicit predicted fishing effort on both the Louisiana and Texas shelves does imply differences in the spatial patterns over which we predicted high levels of fishing effort.  A visual comparison of the predicted spatial effort landscapes during a high and low hypoxia year shows a clear reduction in regions of high fishing effort.  This result would seem to concur with previous studies that showed that in years with spatially extensive bottom water hypoxia (> 20,000 km^2^) reductions in brown shrimp (*F. aztecus*) habitat (~25%) can be observed along the Louisiana shelf [@craig_spatial_2005].  Without a quantifiable measure of the spatial extent of the fishery it is difficult to make conclusions concerning the economic ramifications of spatial shifts in fishery operations.  While we observe changes in the spatial regions at which the fishery operates in response to hypoxia the possibility that an overall reduction in the spatial extent of fishery operations could mitigate such economic consequences.  Therefore, while our findings are strictly suggestive they do seem to indicate that further examination of the spatial extent of fishery operations could be warranted, especially considering the economic and ecological ramifications such changes would have on both the fishery and the Gulf of Mexico ecosystem.

In summary, our analysis indicates that the spatial patterns of hypoxia on the coastal shelf of the northwestern Gulf of Mexico has a significant effect on the spatial dynamics of fishery resources.  In addition, we found that levels of dissolved oxygen have significant non-linear effects on patterns of fishery behavior (tow duration, and tow number) and these patterns suggest reduced catch and increased searching behavior within low oxygen or hypoxia edge habitat, based on a profit maximization model of fishery behavior.  Recently, the effect of seasonal hypoxia on commercial fisheries within the Gulf of Mexico has been pejoratively dismissed [@cowan2009ugly], justified by the consistent increases observed in fishery landings [@chesney_louisiana_2000; @de2008reanalyses] and a general lack of fishery losses in economic rents, or profits [@united2011fisheries; @united2012fisheries].  Additionally, it is argued that the detrimental effects of nutrient inputs into hypoxic coastal systems are often mitigated or offset by the inherent flexibility of nektonic populations [@breitburg2002effects].  However, the dynamics of fisheries is such that detrimental effects do not always manifest as direct loss in rents (Examples??).  Previous studies have shown that in nektonic species the impact of hypoxia is primarily observed not in population dynamics but rather in spatial shifts in abundance [@craig_aggregation_2012;@craig_small_2013] other systems?, supporting the theory that vagile species will move to avoid stressful and deleterious environments if possible.  Our observed changes in the spatial dynamics of the Gulf shrimp fishery constitute substantive indirect effects of hypoxia and eutrophication.  Further, changes in the spatial dynamics of the shrimp fishery could have direct impacts on fishery rents through increased searching behaviors within low oxygen habitats and possibly through increased travel distances to harvest locations.  In addition, to these direct impacts there exists increased opportunities for indirect effects of hypoxia by way of increased bycatch rates due to spatial aggregation and hypoxia mediated dispersal patterns for other non-target nektonic species.  In conclusion, while we historically observed consistent patterns of fishery landings within coastal fisheries in the face of increased occurrence of coastal hypoxia, it is important to recognize that spatially mediated responses to hypoxia will have effects on the ecology and management of fishery resources especially in light of an increased focus on ecosystem based management practices.  



## Acknowledgments


## Literature Cited  


