Hypoxia effects on the spatial dynamics of a coastal fishery
============================================================

Kevin M. Purcell^1\*^, J. Kevin Craig^1^, Jim M. Nance^2^, Martin D.
Smith^3^, Lori S. Bennear^3^

^1^ Beaufort Laboratory, National Marine Fisheries Service, Beaufort,
NC, USA\
^2^ Galveston Laboratory, National Marine Fisheries Service, Galveston,
TX, USA\
^3^ Nicholas School of the Environment, Duke University, Durham, NC,
USA\
^\*^ Corresponding E-mail: kevin@kevin-purcell.com

Abstract
--------

Introduction
------------

While there is significant debate concerning the decline of global
fishery landings [1,2] there is little debate that the spatial footprint
of global fisheries is expanding [3,4]. A recent study [5] reported that
commercial fishing fleets operate in all the global oceans with a ten
fold or greater increase in fishing power in the last 60 years. Fleet
dynamics and fisherman behavior has been the subject of a number of
recent studies[6,7], including a recent review of the literature
pertaining to conceptual models of fleet dynamics indicated that profit
and utility maximization was the most common framework for predicting
fleet behavior [8]. However, there is some debate concerning the role of
profit maximazation in short term or trip-level decision making in
comparison to the perception or aversion to risk[9]. Given that the
status of fishery stocks, the profitability of fisheries, and the
effects of fisheries on ecosystem are a products of not only the amount
of fishing effort but also its spatial allocation, knowledge of how
fishers structure themselves is of increasing importance to proper
ecosystem based fishery management [10,11].

Marine and coastal ecosystems are being increasingly affected by
patterns of environmental hypoxia which have been documented in over 400
marine systems affecting greater than 240,000 km^2^ [12]. Environmental
hypoxia, a condition of \< 2 mgL^-1^ dissolved oxygen (DO), is generally
a product of excess consumption of oxygen through respiration and
chemical processes relative to the rate of production. Hypoxia,
especially in shallow water coastal systems, is more common in areas
with high nutrient inputs, longer residence times and physical
stratification, characteristics common to coastal and estuarine systems
[13]. Currently, the northern Gulf of Mexico (Gulf) experiences one of
the largest seasonal hypoxia events in the western hemisphere [14]. The
areal extent of Gulf hypoxia coverage has been estimated annually since
1985 and has shown significant variation exceeding 20,000 km^2^ in
recent years [14,15]. Hindcasting models and paleo-indicator studies
show indications of low oxygen stress within the Gulf beginning in the
early 1900s becoming increasingly severe during the 1960s and 1970s
[16–18]. The causal mechanisms for natural and anthropogenically
mediated hypoxia have been extensively discussed in the literature
[19–21] with a clear consensus that Gulf hypoxia is driven by increased
eutrophication subsequent to the Mississippi-Atchafalaya River systems
which is directly adjacent to the Louisiana coastal shelf. The increased
nutrient loading to the coastal shelf and the vertical stratification
that result from seasonal river flow creates ideal conditions for the
annual development of bottom water hypoxia [14,19]. The hypoxic zone
(region with \< 2.0 mgL^-1^ DO) is highly variable spatially, depending
on prevailing weather patterns and coastal currents [22–24].

The Gulf shrimp fishery is an open access, otter trawl fishery occurring
throughout the coastal shelf of the Gulf of Mexico Exclusive Economic
Zone (EEZ), from southern Florida to the Texas-Mexico border. The
majority of fishing effort occurs in the northwestern Gulf and
predominantly targets three Penaeid shrimp species: the Brown
*Farfantepenaeus aztecus* and to a lesser extent the White *Litopenaeus
setiferus* and Pink *Farfantepenaeus duorarum* shrimp. The fishery began
in 1917 with an inshore artisanal fleet focusing on a single species *L.
setiferus* and has grown to a large commercialized fleet in excess of
20,000 vessels [25,26]. Historically, Gulf shrimp landings provided
roughly 73% of the total shrimp landings in the US [27] and the fishery
was valued at \< \$500M USD annually, making it one of the most
profitable fisheries in the US [26,28].

The region of the northwestern Gulf associated with the
Mississippi-Atchafaylaya river plum has been referred to as the "Fertile
Fishery Crescent"[29] and has supported some of the most productive
fishing grounds within U.S. coastal waters [30]. The spatial overlap
between this fertile fishing ground and the spatial extent of seasonal
hypoxia has led to a number of studies focused on the interaction
between nektonic populations and coastal hypoxia [31–34]. More
specifically, Craig et al.[35] examined the spatial distribution of *F.
aztecus* in the northwestern Gulf of Mexico and reported that wide
spread hypoxia (\> 20,000 km^2^) results in a \~25% reduction in shrimp
habitat coupled with shifts in spatial distribution both inshore and
offshore of hypoxic regions. Craig and Crowder [36] reported that both
*F. aztecus* and Atlantic Croaker (*Micropogonias undulates*) show clear
patterns of avoidance in very low oxygenated waters and increased
abundance at moderate (1.6-3.7 mgL^-1^) levels of dissolved oxygen,
indicating possible associations with hypoxia edge habitats. More
recently, Craig [37] examined two 4000-5000 km^2^ regions of the
Louisiana coastal shelf, and found that for *F. aztecus* and a number of
finfish species dissolved oxygen avoidance thresholds were on average
1-3 mgL^-1^ and that all species showed strong aggregations within 1-3
km of that edge of hypoxia.

While increased patterns of spatial aggregation could serve as a
spatially mediated response to hypoxia stress it could also facilitate
the possibility of increased fishery bycatch or patterns of
hyperstability within the fishery that could compromise management and
threaten the long-term resilience of populations. Fishery bycatch,
especially within the trawl fisheries, has been identified as a
principle threat to global commercial fish stocks [38,39]. Since the
1980s, Gulf shrimp trawl fishery bycatch has been identified as a key
management issues and has undergone considerable scrutiny [40]. The
issue of fishery bycatch within the Gulf shrimp fishery was of
significant threat to justify an amendment to the Magnuson Fishery
Conservation and Management Act that requires research focused on issues
of bycatch and lead to implementation of an observer program within the
fishery [26]. Gallaway [41] indicated that issues of high bycatch rates
within the shrimp fishery dictate a richer understanding of the temporal
and spatial trends in fishing effort and how those trends are affected
by alterations in the abiotic environment.

In traditional fishery stock assessment models it is assumed that CPUE
is proportional to resource abundance or population size [42,43] and
this relationship is essential to sound management decisions.
Hyperstability is a disproportional condition in which catch per unit
effort (CPUE) displays a non-linear relationship with resource abundance
[44]. This condition can facilitate overestimates of resource biomass
and underestimates of fishery mortality, which can compromise the
management of fishery stocks [42,45]. The spatial and temporal
allocation of fishing effort dictates the relationship between CPUE and
resource abundance and therefor any changes in the spatial distribution
of effort could create patterns of hyperstability that could obfuscate
the effects of hypoxia stress on coastal fishery populations.

In this study we examine the relationship between the spatial allocation
of fishing effort within the northwestern Gulf of Mexico shrimp fishery
and a number of important environmental and economic variables affecting
the spatial region of the fishery. We evaluate the hypothesis that
hypoxia induced shifts in the spatial distribution of coastal nekton
could drive the changes in the spatial allocation of fishing effort
within the Gulf shrimp fishery. Further, we discuss the implications of
changes in the allocation of fishery effort with respect to the future
management the Gulf shrimp fishery and the ecology of the northwestern
Gulf region.

Methods
-------

### Shrimping Effort

In 1999 an electronic log book (ELB) program was implemented in the
northern Gulf of Mexico to quantify the spatial and temporal
distribution of shrimping effort in the Gulf shrimp otter trawl fishery
[46]. A random sample of shrimp vessels was selected each trimester
(Jan-Apr, May-Aug, Sep-Dec) and each vessel was instrumented with an
electronic logbook (ELB). The ELB recorded the time and geographic
position of the vessel every 10 minutes. Individual tows were identified
based on changes in vessel speed which are typically 4-5 times slower
(2-3 knots) when the shrimp nets are deployed than during other
activities (i.e., steaming; 8-10 knots), the duration of each tow was
calculated as the time differential between speed changes [46]. The
starting location of the tow was used to assign a geographic position to
each tow. Comparisons among the ELB, paper logbooks, and observer
records have shown that this methodology provides an accurate
representation of the spatial distribution of shrimping effort [46–48].
The initial years of the ELB program instrumented a small number of
vessels and were considered pilot studies [41,46]. We used ELB data
collected over 6 years (2005-2010) and during the summer trimester (May
– Aug) consisting of 122,185 tow records identified by a date, a tow
duration (hours), and a starting latitude and longitude (Table 1). While
the ELB program covers only a small fraction of the shrimp fleet
(2.91-21.36, Table 1) in the northern Gulf, the random selection of
vessels and extensive spatial coverage (Supp. Fig 1) suggest it is
representative of fleet-wide patterns in shrimping effort.

### Environmental Data

Bottom depth and hydrographic conditions in the northwestern Gulf were
characterized using data from the Southeast Area Monitoring and
Assessment Program (SEAMAP) survey [49]. The SEAMAP survey is a
fishery-independent trawl and hydrographic survey that has been
conducted semi-annually in the northwestern Gulf (-97.3 to -88.0
longitude and 3-110 m depth) since 1987. Bottom environmental conditions
(e.g., temperatures, salinity, dissolved oxygen, depth) were measured at
\approx350 point locations per year chosen based on a stratified random
sampling design using a conductivity, temperature, depth (CTD) profiler.
Prior studies have used these data to quantify spatial patterns in
bottom dissolved oxygen and environmental associations with multiple
demersal species [Reference 35;Reference 36;@craig2010habitat].
Additional details regarding the SEAMAP survey and sampling procedures
can be found in Eldridge [49] and the annual SEAMAP atlases [50].

We generated interpolated surfaces of water depth (m) and summer
(June-July) bottom dissolved oxygen (mgL^-1^) over the northwestern Gulf
of Mexico shelf. Bottom temperature and salinity were considered in
preliminary analyses but were removed due to high correlations with
water depth. Following earlier studies [35], bottom water DO was
interpolated for each year of ELB data (2005-2010) using universal
kriging with a quadratic drift component, and a variable search radius
with a sample count of at least 12 nearest neighbors. Water depth was
interpolated using inverse distance weighting of all SEAMAP records that
temporally correspond to the ELB timeseries ($n$ = 7200).

Because only the starting location of individual shrimp tows, which can
extend over several hours and vary in direction, were known, a spatial
smoothing procedure of the interpolated dissolved oxygen surfaces was
conducted prior to matching individual tows with particular dissolved
oxygen conditions on the shelf. Interpolated surfaces were
post-processed using the Focal Statistics geoprocessing tool (ESRI,
Redlands, CA), to calculate an average interpolation value for each grid
cell based on a defined spatial neighborhood. We defined a square 3x3
neighborhood matrix of 5 km2 cells, with the grid cell of interest
located in the center. For each cell in the interpolated surface the
predicted dissolved oxygen values were averaged across the surrounding
spatial neighborhood covering a 45 km2 area. Contours for final
predicted dissolved oxygen layers were visually assessed for agreement
with point measurements of bottom dissolved oxygen. All interpolations
were conducted in ArcMap v10.1 using the Spatial Analyst or Neighborhood
toolbox (ERSI, Redlands, CA).

### Data set Integration

Individual shrimp tows identified from the ELB database were assigned
bottom DO and depth values by sampling the interpolated and smoothed
maps of hydrographic data collected on SEAMAP cruises. A challenge in
integrating disparate datasets is the different spatial and temporal
scales at which data are collected. Hydrographic data is collected on
SEAMAP cruises that occur over a 6-8 week period and extend from the
Texas-Mexico border to the Mississippi-Alabama border. Effort was
matched spatially to a resolution of $1\,^{\circ}$ longitude along the
Louisiana, Mississippi, and Alabama coast and $1\,^{\circ}$ latitude
along the Texas coast, this resolution matches the historical
designation for data collection within the shrimp fishery [28] and the
weekly spatial operations of the SEAMAP survey [50].

We examined a number of different temporal resolutions for dataset
integrations to find the best compromise between data quantity and
temporal congruence. Temporal integration of the datasets was
complicated by an annual closure of the shrimp fishery in Texas waters
[51–54], which prohibits fishing efforts on the Texas near shore and
offshore shelf from mid-May to mid-July, a period during which much of
the summer SEAMAP sampling in Texas waters takes place. The most
temporally concurrent data integration possible with the available data
was at a resolution of 1-week, however at a 1-week resolution only a
fraction of the fishing effort in Texas coastal waters could be matched
with environmental covariates. Therefore, the closure of the Texas
shrimp fishery functionally eliminates data points in southern Texas
waters at temporal resolutions less than 6 weeks. Therefore, we focus on
a 6 week temporal integration between the fishery-dependent and
fishery-independent data sets for our analysis.

Two economic covariates presumed to influence fishing behavior [8] were
also inlcuded: shrimp market price per pound (*pPND*) and average weekly
diesel fuel price (*pGAL*). The market *pPND* of shrimp is maintained by
NMFS Galveston laboratory as part of the shrimp fishery monitoring
program . The diesel fuel time series (Ultra-low sulfur CARB diesel spot
price) was taken from the U. S. Energy Information Administration
(http://www.eia.gov). This continuous fuel time series consists of daily
spot prices in US dollars for diesel fuel in Los Angeles, CA since 1996.
This time series is highly correlated (R\^{2} = 0.98) with a similar
fuel price dataset specific to the Gulf of Mexico region that did not
begin until June 2006.

### Regression Models

We tested the effects of water depth and bottom dissolved oxygen on the
spatial distribution of shrimping effort on the northwestern Gulf of
Mexico shelf using geospatial regression analysis. We used a
quasi-experimental framework where separate models were generated for
the Louisiana, Mississippi, and parts of the Alabama coast (-93.8 -
-88.0 longitude), a region that experiences recurrent bottom water
hypoxia during summer, and the Texas shelf (-97.3 - -93.8 longitude)
shelf, a region that experiences limited hypoxia [14,15]. We developed
three response variables that reflect different aspects of shrimping
behavior: total shrimping effort, average tow duration, and tow density.
Each response variable was aggregated for cells within a 10x10 minute
(256 km2) spatial grid extending across the northwestern Gulf of Mexico.
Total shrimping effort was the total number of tow hours within each
cell, while alternative response variables were defined as the average
tow duration within a cell and the tow density, or the number of tows
conducted within a cell during a given period. Environmental covariates
were also averaged within each spatial grid cell.

We used generalized additive models (GAMs) to investigate relationships
between shrimping effort and environmental variables (DO, depth) using
both spatial and non-spatial model formulations [55–57]. structure in
which we modeled aggregated effort measurements for both the Louisiana
and Texas coastal shelves . All models were structured with a dependent
variable representing a measure of shrimping effort,
$X_{d,y,(\rho,\varphi)}$ on Julian day (*d*) in year (*y*) for a
specific grid cell with a centroid location ($\rho,\varphi$). Two of the
response variables, total shrimping effort and average tow duration,
were log+1 transformed and modeled with a Gaussian error distribution,
while average tow density was natively modeled assuming a Poisson error
distribution.

$$
\begin{aligned}
X_{d,y,(\rho,\varphi)}& = \alpha_1\,(y)\, +\, \alpha_2\,(pGAL)\, +\, \alpha_3\,(totEFF)\,+\, g_1\,(DO)\,  \\
                      &\,+\, g_2\,(D)\, +\, g_3\,(pPND)\, +\, g_4\,(JD)\,+\, g_5\,(\rho,\varphi)\, +\, e_{d,y,(\rho,\varphi)}
\end{aligned}
$$

The non-spatial model (Eq. 1), included dissolved oxygen (*DO*) in
mgL^-1^, depth (*D*) in meters, average weekly price per pound (*pPND*),
dat of the year ($JD$), and the latitude and longitude of each grid cell
centroid in decimal degrees. All predictors used thin plate regression
splines to model 1- dimensional smoothing functions (Wood 2004) except
the grid cell centroid location ($\rho,\varphi$) which was modeled using
a 2-dimensional smoothing function (Wood 2003). The parametric variables
$\alpha_1$, $\alpha_2$ and $\alpha_3$ are model coefficients for the
year (*y*), average weekly fuel price ($pGAL$), and total annual
shrimping effort (*totEFF*)for the nwGOM during the summer trimester
(May - Aug), and $e_{d,y,(\rho,\varphi)}$ is a model specific error
term. Equation (1) models the average effect of DO on shrimping effort
after accounting for the effects of other smoothed predictors in the
model.

Variable coefficient models are a class of regression model that allow
coefficients to vary smoothly as a function of another model variable
[55]. Variable-coefficient models that map variation in the relationship
between a response and predictor variable across space are often
referred to as geospatial regression models [57] and have recently be
applied to a number of ecological studies [58–61]. The spatial model
formulation (Eq. 2) differs from the stationary formulation by including
and additional 2-dimensional smoothing function that allows the
dissolved oxygen (*DO*)coefficientd to vary smoothly as a function of
space ($\rho,\varphi$):

$$
\begin{aligned}
X_{d,y,(\rho,\varphi)}& = \alpha_1\,(y) + \alpha_2\,(pGAL) + \alpha_3\,(totEFF) + g_1\,(D) + g_2\,(pPND) \\
                      &\,+\, g_3\,(JD)\, +\, g_4\,(\rho,\varphi)\, +\, g_5\,(\rho,\varphi)\,DO\, +\, e_{d,y,(\rho,\varphi)}
\end{aligned}
$$

To clarify the effect of annual hypoxia on the spatial dynamics of
fishery resources on the Louisiana and Texas coastal shelves, we
conducted model projections for both regions comparing periods of high
and low aerial extents of hypoxia. These values were chosen to contrast
two ends of the hypoxia spectrum for years in our time series and are
values upon which our models were trained. All regression models were
conducted in the R 2.14.2 statistical computing environment using the R
package mgcv 1.7-13.

Results
-------

Spatial and non-spatial model formulations were similar in terms of
effect sizes and the statistical significance of the predictor variables
that were included (Table 2). Spatial models were marginally superior to
non-spatial models for both the Louisiana and the Texas shelf in terms
of GCV score (Table 2). Evaluation of model residuals showed no
significant departures from the underlying assumptions of normality and
variance homogeneity.

Most shrimping on the Louisiana shelf occurred in shallow nearshore
waters with effort declining sharply at depths \> 25 m (Fig. 1A). On the
Texas shelf, little effort occurred in shallow, nearshore waters with
effort increasing with increasing depth, particularly from shore to
depths of 30 m (Fig. 1B). Shrimping effort off Louisiana was highest
during the early summer (prior to early July, \< day 184) and declined
sharply by late summer (Fig.). In contrast, effort was low during early
summer off Texas and increased sharply by mid-summer (mid-July \~day
196) (Fig.). These differences in the timing and depth distribution of
the fishery reflect different management objectives for the two regions.
Texas manages for an offshore fishery by imposing an early season
closure so that harvest is restricted until later in the summer when
shrimp are larger and occur in deeper waters, while Louisiana is
primarily a nearshore fishery that harvests smaller shrimp.

The effect of DO on shrimping effort also differed between the two
regions (Fig. 1CD). On the Texas shelf, where hypoxia is much less
severe, shrimping effort declined sharply at DO levels \< 3 mgL^-1^ and
the highest effort occurred at intermediate DO levels (3-5 mgL^-1^). On
the Louisiana shelf, the highest effort also occurred at intermediate DO
levels, but a considerable amount of effort occurred in hypoxic waters.
Effort on the Louisiana shelf was low at 2 mgL-1 but appeared to
increase with further declines in DO (Fig. 1C). In both regions the
highest effort occurred at intermediate DO levels (2.5-3.0 mgL^-1^).

The effect of DO on shrimping effort varied spatially on both the Texas
and the Louisiana shelf (Fig. 2A). When DO was low on the Texas shelf,
effort declined in shallow nearshore waters and increased in deeper
offshore waters. This effect was consistent across nearly the entire
Texas shelf. In contrast, the spatial distribution of DO effects on the
Louisiana shelf were patchier with multiple regions where shrimping
effort was both positively and negatively related to bottom dissolved
oxygen (Fig. 2B). When DO was low on the Louisiana shelf, effort
declined in the Louisiana Bight, a region of severe chronic hypoxia, as
well in mid-shelf regions off of Atchafalaya Bay and to the west.
Shrimping effort increased in nearshore waters west of Atchafalaya Bay
and mid-shelf waters between Terrebonne and Atchafalaya Bay

The spatial distribution of predicted shrimping effort differed between
the years with the largest (2008: 22,300 km^2^) and smallest (2009:
7,100 km^2^) aerial extents of hypoxia (Fig. 3). In 2009, the year of
most severe hypoxia, the highest predicted effort occurred east of the
Mississippi River delta and the lowest predicted effort occurred on the
western Louisiana shelf offshore of Terrebonne and Atchafalaya Bays
(Fig. 3A). In contrast, during 2007, the year of least severe hypoxia,
the highest predicted effort occurred west of the Mississippi River
delta including waters with some of the lowest effort the year before.
On the Texas shelf, the predicted spatial distribution of shrimping
effort showed only minor differences between the two years (Fig. 3CD).
In both years the highest predicted effort occurred in the northeastern
region of the Texas shelf. During the year of severe hypoxia (2008),
regions of high shrimping effort appeared to be contracted in shallow
nearshore waters on the upper Texas shelf and there was a region of very
low effort near the Louisiana-Texas border, During the year of moderate
hypoxia (2009) effort was high in these regions as well, but extended
along the southern Texas shelf and into deeper, midshelf waters (Fig)
perhaps due to the extension of hypoxia into Texas waters.

Models for average tow duration and tow density showed significant or
marginally significant effects for all model parameters (Table 3). The
average duration of a tow on the Louisiana shelf was fairly stable
across a broad range of DO levels (0.5 –5.5 mgL-1), with a decline
around 2 mgL-1 and a peak near 3 mgL-1 (Figure 4A). On the Texas coast
tow duration declined at DO levels \<3 mgL-1 and was highest at moderate
DO (3-4 mgL^-1^) (Figure 4B). Models for tow density were more variable
but showed peaks in tow density at moderate DO levels (2.5-4.5 mgL^-1^)
and declines at DO \< 2 mgL^-1^, particularly on the Louisiana shelf
(Fig. 4CD).

Discussion
----------

Our analysis of three fishing effort metrics, describing 6 years and
\~36,000 fishery tow records, shows strong indications of a spatially
mediated response by the Gulf shrimp fishery to hypoxia in the
northwestern Gulf of Mexico. We observed both positive and negative
effects of dissolved oxygen on the Gulf shrimp fishery in both regional
models. Additionally we observed dramatic patterns in the spatial
allocation of fishery resources when spatially explicit dissolved oxygen
concentrations considered. Previous studies have utilized these methods
to examine distribution shifts in biological resources [58,60,62],
however, to the authors knowledge, this is the first application to the
distribution of fishery resources with respect to environmental
conditions.

The quasi-experimental framework created in our study, through the
regional model comparison, shows us several important contrasts between
the Louisiana and Texas fisheries. First, we observed a negative effect
of low dissolved oxygen on fishing effort in our analysis of the Texas
shelf, this negative effect was observed in waters \< 3 mgL^-1^, and was
not observed in the Louisiana model. This finding was not surprising
given the low occurrence of hypoxia on the Texas shelf, our data set had
only a small number of hypoxic data points for the Texas region (*n*=32)
in comparison to the Louisiana shelf (*n*=5983). This difference in the
magnitude of hypoxia would allow for easier avoidance of hypoxic
conditions spatially, in Texas waters relative to Louisiana waters.
Second, water depth and Julian day showed contrasting relationships with
effort between regions with the Louisiana fishery favoring shallow
waters earlier in the season, and the Texas fishery showing positive
effects in deeper waters later in the season. Additionally, we found
that the market price for shrimp landings had positive effects on effort
on the Texas shelf, specifically at values from \$3-4 USD per pound.
These differences in the regional fishery dynamics would seem to be a
product of differing management practices between the regional
fisheries, specifically the early season closure of Texas shrimping
grounds [52]. This difference between the Louisiana and Texas fisheries
would seem to fit a traditional fishery economics model, in which profit
maximization of the firm, or the fisherman, dictates the behavior of the
firm [8]. Due to the Texas seasonal closure [52,53], shrimp populations
on the Texas shelves are typically of greater maturity and thereby of
greater size, at greater depth during the period of fishery operation
(mid-June - mid-July), this coupled with differences in the size of
fishery fleets between Texas (*n*=2988) and Louisiana (*n*=9778)[26]
would favor a result in which more effort on the Texas shelf is expended
on larger, and on average higher priced, shrimp landings relative to the
Louisiana fishery.

The spatial model formulation showed strong indications of a spatially
mediated response by the Gulf shrimp fishery to regional hypoxia.
Specifically, the heterogeneous spatial relationship between DO and
fishing effort on the Louisina coast. Additionally, the rate of change
(i.e. correlation slopes) for the relationship between dissolved oxygen
and fishing effort displayed larger values, both positive and negative,
at the periphery of regions typically dominated by hypoxia. For
instance, large positive correlations were observed inshore and on the
far western edge of the Louisiana shelf. This regions is typically
associated with the inshore edge of a hypoxic zone derived from
Atchafalaya Bay effluent. The large negative correlations observed
offshore and across the shelf at the eastern edge of the Atchafalya Bay
are also aligned with hypoxia edge habitat, specifically the offshore
extent of hypoxia effects and the mid-shore gap that often develops
between hypoxia water masses which develop from the Mississippi River
and the Atachafalya Bay[19]. These findings on the Louisiana shelf would
seem to fit the results of previous studies focused on the species
distributional responses to hypoxia. A recent study by Craig [37],
observed that the abundance of *F. aztecus* on the Louisiana shelf was
elevated at distances from 1-3 km from the edge of the hypoxic zone,
additionally this study showed that positive catches were spatially
distributed both inshore and offshore of the hypoxic zone. Further,
additional studies have documented clear patterns of low oxygen (\< 3
mgL^-1^) avoidance behavior among populations of *F. aztecus* and other
nektonic species [35,36]. While these studies do not temporally overlap
our study the apparent pattern of spatially mediated avoidance of low
oxygen conditions does display a spatial similarity to the response of
the fishery itself, and would seem to support our hypothesis that while
coastal hypoxia does not seem to be negatively effecting landings
[32,63,64] there are clear patterns of spatial effects on the allocation
of effort which could have both ecological and economics consequences.

In order to compare the spatial dynamics of the shrimp fishery during
periods of high and low hypoxia we conducted model simulations
comparinig predicted spatial distribution of fishing effort in 2008
(20,500 km^-2^) and 2009 (8000 km^-2^), annual fishery effort was
relatively similar in both years with 80,732 and 76,427 total tow hours,
respectively. This similarity in total fishing effort between model
simulations indicates that relative shifts in effort allocation may be
informative. In the Louisiana simulations the most intriquing results
were the spatial reallocation and consolidation of fishing effort,
during high hypoxia. Our analysis predicted fishing effort values east
of the Mississippi River delta would be more than double the predicted
fishing effort values for the entire Louisiana shelf. Further we
observed regions of fishing effort on the Louisiana shelf in which
effort is predicted to be reducted by \> 50%. The spatial shifts and
compression of fishery effort allocation during periods of high hypoxia,
highlight the indirect effects of low dissolved oxygen concentration on
the allocation of fishery resources. This pattern of high fishing effort
allocation just east of Mississippi River delta is compariable to
previous findings of effort allocation surrounding marine reserves
[65,66]. Abbot and Haynie [67] recently examined the ecological and
economic implications of failing to anticipate changes in fishery
behavior relative to management imposed spatial closures. It seems that
similar concerns are relevant to the Gulf shrimp fishery if the observed
shifts indicated by our simulations would be a recurrent trend resulting
from annual hypoxia phenomina.

Additionally the spatial relationships between DO and fishing effort on
the Louisiana shelf are more telling when compared to the model
simulation results for the Texas shelf. Overall, predicted effort
patterns on the Texas shelf during low hypoxia were less spatially
heterogeneous and correlated tightly with depth, with most effort
focused inshore between Galveston and Corpus Christi bays. Several
significant difference were evident for the Texas model simulations
during years of high hypoxia, particularly a region of low predicted
effort in the north eastern corner of the Texas shelf and a significant
expansion of predicted fishery across much of the souther Texas coastal
shelf. These findings, especially spatial shifts away from Corpus
Christi Bau and in to deeper waters were unexpected due to limited
extent of hypoxia in Texas waters, which typically do not extend south
of Galveston Bay [68]. The dramatic difference in predicted effort
between high and low hypoxia years on the Texas shelf could indicate
that the fishery responds to hypoxia in aggregate and not with more
regionally distinct behavior. This interpretation is further supported
by the fact that the spatial shifts observed do not seem to coincide
with what is known about the incidence of hypoxia along the Texas
coastal shelf [69]. Dimarco et al [70] showed, based on 2007-2008 SEAMAP
data, that the Mississippi-Atchafalaya river system is not the only
causal mechanism for hypoxia on the Texas shelf, however the only river
system that feeds directly to the coastal shelf and not through an
embayment or an estuary is the Brazos River [70,71] which is located
just south of Galveston Bay and relatively far from the offshore shifts
we observed adjacent to Corpus Christi Bay.

One criticism of our study design could be that without tow specific
landings information, a reduction in fishing effort within or adjacent
to low oxygen regions could be seen as ambiguous. This ambiguity derives
from the issue of hyperstability, a condition in which catch rates
remain unchanged regardless of reductions in population abundance
because the fishery is better able to target and harvest a given
resource [44,72]. To address these issues we developed models based on
two additional response variables: average tow duration and tow density
to indirectly evaluate tow quality. The underlying assumption for all of
our statistical models is that the parties (fisherman) being examined
are following a profit maximization scheme and their behaviors are
dictated by an underlying imperative to maximize returns while
minimizing effort [7,8]. Given this assumption and the knowledge that
shrimp fisherman possess knowledge about landings accumulation rates
based on readings from a tensiometer, a device that measures tension on
the trawl rigging, our finding for the Louisiana self that at dissolved
oxygen values \< 2.5 mgL^-1^ average tow duration is decreasing could
indicated reduced tow quality in hypoxic conditions. We also found
evidence of higher tow density within grid cells that have dissolved
oxygen levels 2.5- 3.5 mgL^-1^ along the Louisiana shelf, possibly
indicating increased searching behavior within low oxygen habitat. To a
lesser degree similar patterns were observed in low oxygen conditions
within the Texas fishery indicating that these fishery behaviors may
indeed be a response to catch indicators and not solely a location
driven response to previous knowledge concerning the annual region over
which hypoxia occurs.

If the spatial dynamics of the shrimp fishery are changing in response
to seasonal hypoxia, increased opportunities for new biological
interaction with non-target species could be created. Nance et al. [73]
quantified levels of bycatch biomass within the shrimp trawl fishery and
found that on average 29 kg of bycatch, or roughly 1300 organisms per
hour, were captured by Gulf shrimp trawl fisherman. While management
initiatives have been developed since this time, such as bycatch
reduction devices (BRDs), their efficacy has had diminishing returns
over time [26,74]. It would seem, given that previous studies have
reported that shrimp and nektonic species aggregate within 1-3 km of the
edge of hypoxic zones [36,37], that any attempt by the fishery to modify
its spatial deployment in response to or in anticipation of hypoxia
effects, will increase opportunities for bycatch and additional
non-target species interactions to develop.

While our analysis does not permit a quantification of the spatial
extent of the Gulf shrimp fishery, differences in the spatially explicit
predicted fishing effort on both the Louisiana and Texas shelves does
imply differences in the spatial patterns over which we predicted high
levels of fishing effort. A visual comparison of the predicted spatial
effort landscapes during a high and low hypoxia year shows a clear
reduction in regions of high fishing effort. This result would seem to
concur with previous studies that showed that in years with spatially
extensive bottom water hypoxia (\> 20,000 km^2^) reductions in brown
shrimp (*F. aztecus*) habitat (\~25%) can be observed along the
Louisiana shelf [35]. Without a quantifiable measure of the spatial
extent of the fishery it is difficult to make conclusions concerning the
economic ramifications of spatial shifts in fishery operations. While we
observe changes in the spatial regions at which the fishery operates in
response to hypoxia the possibility that an overall reduction in the
spatial extent of fishery operations could mitigate such economic
consequences. Therefore, while our findings are strictly suggestive they
do seem to indicate that further examination of the spatial extent of
fishery operations could be warranted, especially considering the
economic and ecological ramifications such changes would have on both
the fishery and the Gulf of Mexico ecosystem.

In summary, our analysis indicates that the spatial patterns of hypoxia
on the coastal shelf of the northwestern Gulf of Mexico has a
significant effect on the spatial dynamics of fishery resources. In
addition, we found that levels of dissolved oxygen have significant
non-linear effects on patterns of fishery behavior (tow duration, and
tow number) and these patterns suggest reduced catch and increased
searching behavior within low oxygen or hypoxia edge habitat, based on a
profit maximization model of fishery behavior. Recently, the effect of
seasonal hypoxia on commercial fisheries within the Gulf of Mexico has
been pejoratively dismissed [75], justified by the consistent increases
observed in fishery landings [30,76] and a general lack of fishery
losses in economic rents, or profits [Reference 77;
@united2012fisheries]. Additionally, it is argued that the detrimental
effects of nutrient inputs into hypoxic coastal systems are often
mitigated or offset by the inherent flexibility of nektonic populations
[78]. However, the dynamics of fisheries is such that detrimental
effects do not always manifest as direct loss in rents (Examples??).
Previous studies have shown that in nektonic species the impact of
hypoxia is primarily observed not in population dynamics but rather in
spatial shifts in abundance [37,79] other systems?, supporting the
theory that vagile species will move to avoid stressful and deleterious
environments if possible. Our observed changes in the spatial dynamics
of the Gulf shrimp fishery constitute substantive indirect effects of
hypoxia and eutrophication. Further, changes in the spatial dynamics of
the shrimp fishery could have direct impacts on fishery rents through
increased searching behaviors within low oxygen habitats and possibly
through increased travel distances to harvest locations. In addition, to
these direct impacts there exists increased opportunities for indirect
effects of hypoxia by way of increased bycatch rates due to spatial
aggregation and hypoxia mediated dispersal patterns for other non-target
nektonic species. In conclusion, while we historically observed
consistent patterns of fishery landings within coastal fisheries in the
face of increased occurrence of coastal hypoxia, it is important to
recognize that spatially mediated responses to hypoxia will have effects
on the ecology and management of fishery resources especially in light
of an increased focus on ecosystem based management practices.

Acknowledgments
---------------

Literature Cited
----------------

​1. Worm B, Branch TA (2012) The future of fish. Trends in ecology &
evolution 27: 594–599.

​2. Pauly D, Alder J, Bennett E, Christensen V, Tyedmers P, et al.
(2003) The future for fisheries. Science 302: 1359–1361.

​3. Stewart KR, Lewison RL, Dunn DC, Bjorkland RH, Kelez S, et al.
(2010) Characterizing fishing effort and spatial extent of coastal
fisheries. PloS one 5: e14451.

​4. Swartz W, Sala E, Tracey S, Watson R, Pauly D (2010) The spatial
expansion and ecological footprint of fisheries (1950 to present). PloS
one 5: e15143.

​5. Watson RA, Cheung WW, Anticamara JA, Sumaila RU, Zeller D, et al.
(2012) Global marine yield halved as fishing intensity redoubles. Fish
and Fisheries.

​6. Abernethy KE, Allison EH, Molloy PP, Côté IM (2007) Why do fishers
fish where they fish? Using the ideal free distribution to understand
the behaviour of artisanal reef fishers. Canadian Journal of Fisheries
and Aquatic Sciences 64: 1595–1604.

​7. Branch TA, Hilborn R, Haynie AC, Fay G, Flynn L, et al. (2006) Fleet
dynamics and fishermen behavior: lessons for fisheries managers.
Canadian Journal of Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences 63: 1647–1668.
doi:10.1139/f06-072.

​8. van Putten IE, Kulmala S, Thébaud O, Dowling N, Hamon KG, et al.
(2012) Theories and behavioural drivers underlying fleet dynamics
models. Fish and Fisheries 13: 216–235.
doi:10.1111/j.1467-2979.2011.00430.x.

​9. Dowling NA, Wilcox C, Mangel M (2013) Risk sensitivity and the
behaviour of fishing vessels. Fish and Fisheries: n/a–a. Available:
<http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/faf.12064>.

​10. McCluskey SM, Lewison RL (2008) Quantifying fishing effort: a
synthesis of current methods and their applications. Fish and Fisheries
9: 188–200.

​11. Salas S, Gaertner D (2004) The behavioural dynamics of fishers:
management implications. Fish and Fisheries 5: 153–167.

​12. Diaz RJ, Rosenberg R (2008) Spreading Dead Zones and Consequences
for Marine Ecosystems. Science 321: 926–929.
doi:10.1126/science.1156401.

​13. Rabalais NN, Turner RE, Díaz RJ, Justi‵c D (2009) Global change and
eutrophication of coastal waters. ICES Journal of Marine Science:
Journal du Conseil 66: 1528–1537. doi:10.1093/icesjms/fsp047.

​14. Rabalais NN, Turner RE, Scavia D (2002) Beyond Science into Policy:
Gulf of Mexico Hypoxia and the Mississippi River. BioScience 52:
129–142. doi:10.1641/0006-3568(2002)052[0129:BSIPGO]2.0.CO;2.

​15. Turner RE, Rabalais NN, Justic D (2008) Gulf of Mexico hypoxia:
Alternate states and a legacy. Environmental science & technology 42:
2323–2327.

​16. Justic D, Jr. VJB, Scavia D, Hetland RD (2007) Forecasting Gulf’s
Hypoxia: The Next 50 Years?. Estuaries and Coasts 30: 791–801.
doi:10.2307/27654716.

​17. Rabalais NN, Turner RE, Gupta BKS, Platon E, Parsons ML (2007)
Sedimnts tell the history of eutrophication and hypoxia in the northern
Gulf of Mexico. Ecological Applications 17: S129–S143.
doi:10.1890/06-0644.1.

​18. Greene RM, Lehrter JC, III JDH (2009) Multiple regression models
for hindcasting and forecasting midsummer hypoxia in the Gulf of Mexico.
Ecological Applications 19: 1161–1175. doi:10.1890/08-0035.1.

​19. Bianchi TS, DiMarco SF, Cowan Jr. JH, Hetland RD, Chapman P, et al.
(2010) The science of hypoxia in the Northern Gulf of Mexico: A review.
Science of The Total Environment 408: 1471–1484.
doi:10.1016/j.scitotenv.2009.11.047.

​20. Rabalais NN, D\\\~iaz RJ, Levin LA, Turner RE, Gilbert D, et al.
(2010) Dynamics and distribution of natural and human-caused hypoxia.
Biogeosciences 7: 585–619.

​21. Zhang J, Gilbert D, Gooday AJ, Levin L, Naqvi SWA, et al. (2010)
Natural and human-induced hypoxia and consequences for coastal areas:
synthesis and future development. Biogeosciences 7: 1443–1467.
doi:10.5194/bg-7-1443-2010.

​22. Feng Y, DiMarco SF, Jackson GA (2012) Relative role of wind forcing
and riverine nutrient input on the extent of hypoxia in the northern
Gulf of Mexico. Geophysical Research Letters 39.

​23. Hetland RD, DiMarco SF (2012) Skill assessment of a hydrodynamic
model of circulation over the Texas–Louisiana continental shelf. Ocean
Modelling 43: 64–76.

​24. Wiseman WJ, Rabalais NN, Turner RE, Dinnel SP, MacNaughton A (1997)
Seasonal and interannual variability within the Louisiana coastal
current: stratification and hypoxia. Journal of Marine Systems 12:
237–248.

​25. Condrey R, Fuller D (2005) The US Gulf shrimp fishery. Climate
Variability, Climate Change and Fisheries: 89.

​26. Diamond SL (2004) Bycatch quotas in the Gulf of Mexico shrimp trawl
fishery: can they work?. Reviews in Fish Biology and Fisheries 14:
207–237. doi:10.1007/s11160-004-7121-0.

​27. Iverson K, Martin A (2009) Fisheries of the United States. Journal
of Marine Education 25.

​28. Nance JM (1993) Effort Trends for the Gulf of Mexico Shrimp
Fishery.

​29. Gunter G (1963) The fertile fisheries crescent. Journal of the
Mississippi Academy of Sciences 9: 286–290.

​30. Chesney EJ, Baltz DM, Thomas RG (2000) Louisiana Estuarine and
Coastal Fisheries and Habitats: Perspectives from a Fish’s Eye View.
Ecological Applications 10: 350–366.

​31. Caddy JF (1993) Toward a comparative evaluation of human impacts on
fishery ecosystems of enclosed and semi-enclosed seas. Reviews in
Fisheries Science 1: 57–95. doi:10.1080/10641269309388535.

​32. Breitburg DL, Craig JK, Fulford RS, Rose KA, Boynton WR, et al.
(2009) Nutrient enrichment and fisheries exploitation: interactive
effects on estuarine living resources and their management.
Hydrobiologia 629: 31–47. doi:10.1007/s10750-009-9762-4.

​33. Rose KA, Adamack AT, Murphy CA, Sable SE, Kolesar SE, et al. (2009)
Does hypoxia have population-level effects on coastal fish? Musings from
the virtual world. Journal of Experimental Marine Biology and Ecology
381, Supplement: S188–S203. doi:10.1016/j.jembe.2009.07.022.

​34. Essington TE, Paulsen CE (2010) Quantifying Hypoxia Impacts on an
Estuarine Demersal Community Using a Hierarchical Ensemble Approach.
Ecosystems 13: 1035–1048. doi:10.1007/s10021-010-9372-z.

​35. Craig JK, Crowder LB, Henwood TA (2005) Spatial distribution of
brown shrimp (Farfantepenaeus aztecus) on the northwestern Gulf of
Mexico shelf: effects of abundance and hypoxia. Canadian Journal of
Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences 62: 1295–1308.

​36. Craig JK, Crowder LB (2005) Hypoxia-induced habitat shifts and
energetic consequences in Atlantic croaker and brown shrimp on the Gulf
of Mexico shelf. MEPS 294: 79–94.

​37. Craig JK (2012) Aggregation on the edge: effects of hypoxia
avoidance on the spatial distribution of brown shrimp and demersal
fishes in the Northern Gulf of Mexico. MEPS 445: 75–95.

​38. Davies RWD, Cripps SJ, Nickson A, Porter G (2009) Defining and
estimating global marine fisheries bycatch. Marine Policy 33: 661–672.
doi:10.1016/j.marpol.2009.01.003.

​39. Kumar AB, Deepthi GR (2006) Trawling and by-catch: Implications on
marine ecosystem. Current Science 90: 922–931.

​40. Crowder LB, Murawski SA (1998) Fisheries Bycatch: Implications for
Management. Fisheries 23: 8–17.
doi:10.1577/1548-8446(1998)023\<0008:FBIFM\>2.0.CO;2.

​41. Gallaway BJ, Cole JG, Martin LR, Nance JM, Longnecker M (2003) An
Evaluation of an Electronic Logbook as a More Accurate Method of
Estimating Spatial Patterns of Trawling Effort and Bycatch in the Gulf
of Mexico Shrimp Fishery. North American Journal of Fisheries Management
23: 787–809. doi:10.1577/M02-105.

​42. Erisman BE, Allen LG, Claisse JT, Pondella DJ, Miller EF, et al.
(2011) The illusion of plenty: hyperstability masks collapses in two
recreational fisheries that target fish spawning aggregations. Canadian
Journal of Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences 68: 1705–1716.
doi:10.1139/f2011-090.

​43. Quinn TJ, Deriso RB (1999) Quantitative fish dynamics. Biological
Resource Management Series.

​44. Harley SJ, Myers RA, Dunn A (2001) Is catch-per-unit-effort
proportional to abundance?. Canadian Journal of Fisheries and Aquatic
Sciences 58: 1760–1772. doi:10.1139/f01-112.

​45. Crecco V, Overholtz WJ (1990) Causes of Density-Dependent
Catchability for Georges Bank Haddock Melanogrammus aeglefinus. Canadian
Journal of Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences 47: 385–394.
doi:10.1139/f90-040.

​46. Gallaway BJ, Cole JG, Martin LR, Nance JM, Longnecker M (2003)
Description of a Simple Electronic Logbook Designed to Measure Effort in
the Gulf of Mexico Shrimp Fishery. North American Journal of Fisheries
Management 23: 581–589.
doi:10.1577/1548-8675(2003)023\<0581:DOASEL\>2.0.CO;2.

​47. Gallaway B, Cole JG, L.R. M (2001) Development of direct measures
of Gulf of Mexico shrimp fishing effort as a means to evaluate existing
measures of shrimp fishing effort and juvenile red snapper bycatch, year
II pilot study.. Tampa, FL.

​48. Gallaway BJ, Cole JG, Martin LR (2000) Development of direct
measures of Gulf of Mexico shrimp fishing effort as a means to evaluate
existing measures of effort and juvenile red snapper bycatch, pilot
study.. Tampa, FL.

​49. Eldridge PJ (1988) The Southeast Area Monitoring and Assessment
Program (SEAMAP): a state-federal-university program for collection,
management, and dissemination of fishery-independent data and
information in the southeastern United States. Marine Fisheries Review
50: 29.

​50. Rester JK (2011) SEAMAP environmental and biological atlas of the
Gulf of Mexico. Gulf States Marine Fisheries Commission.

​51. Cody TJ (1989) Texas shrimp fishery management plan: source
document. Texas Parks and Wildlife Dept., Coastal Fisheries Branch.

​52. Klima EDWARDF, Baxter KENNETHN, Patella FJ (1982) A review of the
offshore shrimp fishery and the 1981 Texas closure.

​53. Matlock GC (2010) Did the Texas Closure Increase Brown Shrimp
Catches off Texas?. North American Journal of Fisheries Management 30:
799–804. doi:10.1577/M09-177.1.

​54. Nance JM, Martinez EX, Klima EF (1994) Feasibility of Improving the
Economic Return from the Gulf of Mexico Brown Shrimp Fishery. North
American Journal of Fisheries Management 14: 522–536.
doi:10.1577/1548-8675(1994)014\<0522:FOITER\>2.3.CO;2.

​55. Hastie T, Tibshirani R (1993) Varying-Coefficient Models. Journal
of the Royal Statistical Society Series B (Methodological) 55: 757–796.

​56. Wood SN (2004) Stable and efficient multiple smoothing parameter
estimation for generalized additive models. Journal of the American
Statistical Association 99: 673–686.

​57. Wood S (2006) Generalized Additive Models: An Introduction with R.
1st ed. Chapman and Hall/CRC.

​58. Bacheler NM, Ciannelli L, Bailey KM, Duffy-Anderson JT (2010)
Spatial and temporal patterns of walleye pollock (Theragra chalcogramma)
spawning in the eastern Bering Sea inferred from egg and larval
distributions. Fisheries Oceanography, Fisheries Oceanography 19:
107–120. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2419.2009.00531.x,
10.1111/j.1365-2419.2009.00531.x.

​59. Bartolino V, Ciannelli L, Bacheler NM, Chan K-S (2010) Ontogenetic
and sex-specific differences in density-dependent habitat selection of a
marine fish population. Ecology 92: 189–200. doi:10.1890/09-1129.1.

​60. Ciannelli L, Bailey KM, Chan K-S, Stenseth NC (2007) Phenological
and geographical patterns of walleye pollock (Theragra chalcogramma)
spawning in the western Gulf of Alaska. Canadian Journal of Fisheries
and Aquatic Sciences 64: 713–722.

​61. Ciannelli L, Bartolino V, Chan K-S (2012) Non-additive and
non-stationary properties in the spatial distribution of a large marine
fish population. Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences
279: 3635–3642. doi:10.1098/rspb.2012.0849.

​62. Bartolino V, Cardinale M, Svedäng H, Linderholm HW, Casini M, et
al. (2012) Historical spatiotemporal dynamics of eastern North Sea cod.
Canadian Journal of Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences 69.

​63. Diaz RJ, Solow A (1999) Ecological and economic consequences of
hypoxia.

​64. Chesney EJ, Baltz DM (2001) The effects of hypoxia on the northern
Gulf of Mexico coastal ecosystem: a fisheries perspective. Coastal and
Estuarine Studies 58: 321–354.

​65. Kellner JB, Tetreault I, Gaines SD, Nisbet RM (2007) Fishing the
line near marine reserves in single and multispecies fisheries.
Ecological Applications 17: 1039–1054.

​66. e Costa BH, Batista MI, Gonçalves L, Erzini K, Caselle JE, et al.
(2013) Fishers? Behaviour in Response to the Implementation of a Marine
Protected Area. PloS one 8: e65057.

​67. Abbott JK, Haynie AC (2012) What are we protecting? Fisher behavior
and the unintended consequences of spatial closures as a fishery
management tool. Ecological Applications 22: 762–777.

​68. Rabalais NN, Turner RE, Jr. WJW (2002) Gulf of Mexico Hypoxia,
a.k.a. “The Dead Zone.” Annual Review of Ecology and Systematics 33:
235–263.

​69. Osterman LE (2003) Benthic foraminifers from the continental shelf
and slope of the Gulf of Mexico: an indicator of shelf hypoxia.
Estuarine, Coastal and Shelf Science 58: 17–35.

​70. DiMarco SF, Strauss J, May N, Mullins-Perry RL, Grossman EL, et al.
(2012) Texas Coastal Hypoxia Linked to Brazos River Discharge as
Revealed by Oxygen Isotopes. Aquatic Geochemistry 18: 159–181.
doi:10.1007/s10498-011-9156-x.

​71. Harper DE, McKinney LD, Nance JM, Salzer RR (1991) Recovery
responses of two benthic assemblages following an acute hypoxic event on
the Texas continental shelf, northwestern Gulf of Mexico. Geological
Society, London, Special Publications 58: 49–64.

​72. Rose GA, Kulka DW (1999) Hyperaggregation of fish and fisheries:
how catch-per-unit-effort increased as the northern cod (Gadus morhua)
declined. Canadian Journal of Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences 56:
118–127. doi:10.1139/f99-207.

​73. Nance JM, Foster D, Martinez E, McIlwain T, Nichols S, et al.
(1998) Report to Congress. Southeastern United States Shrimp Trawl
Bycatch Program NOAA National Marine Fisheries Service, Southeast
Fisheries Science Center Galveston Laboratory.

​74. Foster DG, Scott-Denton E (2004) Status of bycatch reduction device
performance and research in North-Central and Western Gulf of Mexico.
Gulf of Mexico Fishery Management Council, The Commons at Rivergate,
Tampa, FL.

​75. Cowan Jr JH (2009) Are the Ugly Truths Not Ugly Enough?. Open Fish
Science Journal 2: 87–89.

​76. de Mutsert K, Cowan JH, Essington TE, Hilborn R (2008) Reanalyses
of Gulf of Mexico fisheries data: landings can be misleading in
assessments of fisheries and fisheries ecosystems. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences 105: 2740–2744.

​77. Division USNMFSFS (2011) Fisheries of the United States, 2011. U.S.
Department of Commerce, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration,
National Marine Fisheries Service.. Available:
<http://books.google.com/books?id=9Qy1nQEACAAJ>.

​78. Breitburg D (2002) Effects of hypoxia, and the balance between
hypoxia and enrichment, on coastal fishes and fisheries. Estuaries 25:
767–781.

​79. Craig JK, Bosman SH (2013) Small Spatial Scale Variation in Fish
Assemblage Structure in the Vicinity of the Northwestern Gulf of Mexico
Hypoxic Zone. Estuaries and Coasts 36: 268–285.
doi:10.1007/s12237-012-9577-9.
